# not_in_kansas_anymore:
*An Exploratory Project Seeking to Understand the Shift of Tornado Alley*

The Central US is famously prone to tornadoes. The region most susceptible to tornadoes is colloquially referred to as 'Tornado Alley'. As changes to the climate have accelerated over the past several decades, this susceptible region is widely considered to have shifted eastward. In this project, we use NOAA's database of storm events and its database of aggregate climate data to examine and make more precise this shift.

We've split this task up into several parts:
* First, we need to establish that Tornado Alley has actually moved. Doing so requires detailed examination of the distribution of tornadoes in each given year since systematic data gathering began, in 1950. Since Tornado Alley does not have a strict technical definition, we need to produce a definition. Our conception of Tornado Alley is based on the following statement: *In a given period of time, Tornado Alley is the region of the US in which high-strength tornadoes occur with the highest frequency.* For us, a "high-strength" tornado is one at or above F3 (or EF3).
  *  Our most basic model of Tornado Alley will take the mean position of all significant tornadoes occuring in a given year and the covariance matrix of the distribution of significant tornadoes, using these two factors to determine Tornado Alley as an elliptical region around the mean. We'll seek to show that the change in this region in the years since 1950 is statistically significant. We'll then use a simple regression model to project the observed trend into coming years.
  *  The distribution of tornadoes in the US in any given year does not appear to have any symmetry, let alone the rotational symmetry of a Gaussian distribution. As such, we have relatively little reason to believe that the mean position of all tornadoes in a given year is an ideal location to call 'Tornado Alley'. We'll repeat our previous analysis working instead with the median latitude and longitude of tornadoes in a given year, using that as the center of Tornado Alley.
  *  Beyond the lack of symmetry, we have reason to doubt that the distribution of tornadoes is unimodal. As such, it's reasonable to believe that both the mean and median position of tornadoes may be poor indicators of the center of Tornado Alley. We circumvent this possible issue with a more sophisticated model of the distribution of tornadoes in a given time period using Kernel Density Estimation. Given such a model, we can identify Tornado Alley with the connected region of highest empirical density of tornadoes in that time period. We'll then repeat our previous analyses, showing that this position has indeed shifted to a statistically significant degree and forecasting the future of Tornado Alley.
* Given the increasing pace of change in the climate, we believe it reasonable to suspect that linearly projecting changes in the location of Tornado Alley forward in time may not be accurate in the medium-to-long term. As such, we seek to develop a characteristic climate profile of Tornado Alley. Using such a profile, future changes to Tornado Alley could be predicted from the results of a long-term climate forecasting model.
  *  To create such a climate profile we look to solve a classification problem in which we distinguish between the aggregate climate data of points within Tornado Alley and the aggregate climate data of points outside Tornado Alley. Finding an appropriately predictive decision boundary between these two classes of climate data would allow for Tornado Alley to be associated with observable aggregate climatic information about a region, rather than purely determined by the empirical distribution of tornadoes.
